# 3.2.1: If, Else, Else If

## Learning Objectives

By the end of this lesson, you should be able to do the following:

* [ ] Understand and use the `if, else, else if` statements.

## If Statement

An "**if statement**" is a control-flow "**code block**" that runs if a condition is `true`. A code block is a section of code surrounded by curly braces. We'll talk more about what `true` means later in [Module 4.3: Boolean And, Not](../3.3-boolean-operators/3.3.3-boolean-and-not.md#boolean-values).

### Simple Conditional Example: Secret Phrase

Let's write a program that changes the output value of `"hello world"` if we did not type in the secret phrase.

```javascript
var main = function (input) {
  // Set a default value for myOutputValue
  var myOutputValue = 'hello world';
  // If input is our secret phrase, change the value of myOutputValue
  if (input == 'palatable papaya') {
    myOutputValue = 'you wrote the secret phrase!';
  }
  // return myOutputValue as output
  return myOutputValue;
};
```

The if statement on line 5 has the conditional that tests if `input` is equal to `'palatable papaya'`.&#x20;

If `input` is equal to `'palatable papaya'`, the code runs between the curly braces on lines 5 and 7, i.e. the "**if block**".\
If `input` is not equal to our phrase, the if block does not run.

Code blocks may or may not run depending on "[**control flow**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Control\_flow)", i.e. the logic of our app. The 1st way we learned to use code blocks was with functions. If statements are a 2nd way. We'll learn a 3rd code block syntax later in [6.2: Loops](../3.4-loops.md).

Try inputting secret and non-secret phrases into the program. Enter the secret phrase and click the button to see `'you wrote the secret phrase!'`. Enter anything else and click the button to see the default output `hello world`.

{% hint style="info" %}
Note the distinction in our code example between variable _**declaration**_ and _**assignment**_. On line 2 we "declare" the variable `myOutputValue` with the `var` key word. This creates the named container that we can store values inside. On line 5 we "assign" a new value to the `myOutputValue` container. The old value is overwritten and non-retrievable. Notice that declaration with the `var` keyword is only done _once_ per variable. Please do not use `var` when assigning new values to existing variables.
{% endhint %}

## Dice Game

Let's build a program to guess dice rolls. We will start simple: the user guesses the number the computer rolls.\
\
To build the dice game, we can expand on the [Random Dice Roll example](../3.1-intro-to-control-flow/#random-dice-rolls) from [3.1 Intro to Logic and Control Flow](../3.1-intro-to-control-flow/).

```javascript
var rollDice = function () {
  // Generate a decimal from 0 through 6, inclusive of 0 and exclusive of 6.
  var randomDecimal = Math.random() * 6;

  // Remove the decimal with the floor operation.
  // This will be an integer from 0 to 5 inclusive.
  var randomInteger = Math.floor(randomDecimal);

  // Add 1 to get valid dice rolls of 1 through 6 inclusive.
  var diceNumber = randomInteger + 1;

  return diceNumber;
};
```

### Dice Game Logic

Let's implement the logical rules to our dice game. If the user enters the same number as the dice roll, they win.

```javascript
var main = function (input) {
  // Generate a random dice number
  var randomDiceNumber = rollDice();

  // Default output value is 'you lose'.
  var myOutputValue = 'you lose';

  // If input matches randomDiceNumber, update output.
  if (input == randomDiceNumber) {
    myOutputValue = 'you win';
  }

  // Return output.
  return myOutputValue;
};
```

## Else Statement

An "**else statement**" is a control-flow "**code block**" that runs if preceding `if and else if` conditions are `false`.

### Simple Conditional Example: Secret Phrase

Let's write a program that returns the output value of `"the door shall not open"` if we type in wrong phrase.

```javascript
var main = function (input) {
  // Set a default value for myOutputValue
  var myOutputValue = 'hello world';
  // If input is our secret phrase, change the value of myOutputValue
  if (input == 'palatable papaya') {
    myOutputValue = 'you wrote the secret phrase!';
  }
  else{
    myOutputValue ='the door shall not open!';
  }
  
  // return myOutputValue as output
  return myOutputValue;
};
```

If the input for line 5 is not `palatable papaya`, the code on line 9 will run instead of line 6, assigning `'the door shall not open!'` as the `myOutputValue` variable.

Instead of using an initial default value like in the previous example, the else block can be used to assign an alternate `myOutputValue` for when the "**if block**" fails.

Try inputting secret and non-secret phrases into the program.&#x20;

## Else if Statement

An "**else if statement**" is a control-flow "**code block**" that runs if the `if` condition is `false` and is used to specify additional conditions so that other "**code blocks**" may run.

### Simple Conditional Example: Secret Phrase

Let's write a program that have multiple alternative output values.

```javascript
var main = function (input) {
  // Set a default value for myOutputValue
  var myOutputValue = 'the door shall not open.';
  // If input is our secret phrase, change the value of myOutputValue
  if (input == 'palatable papaya') {
    myOutputValue = 'you wrote the secret phrase!';
  }
  else if (input == 'not so palatable papaya'){
    myOutputValue += ' but you are nearly there.'
  }
  else{
    myOutputValue +=' nope, this is far from the right phrase.';
  }
  
  // return myOutputValue as output
  return myOutputValue;
};
```

If the input for line 5 is `not so palatable papaya`, the code on line 9 will run instead of line 6.

In this example, the `else if` block would add on to the default values of line 3 so that `myOutputValue = 'the door shall not open. but you are nearly there'`

Line 12 in the `else` block will not run at all unless we input a value that is not `'palatable papaya'` or `'not so palatable papaya'`

Try inputting phrases into the program to get the three different outputs.&#x20;

## Exercises

### **Follow Along**

Duplicate and run the code above.

### Twice the guess

Update our dice game logic such that the user wins if the dice roll is 2 times the guess, e.g. a guess of 1 and roll of 2, a guess of 2 and roll of 4, etc. To win this updated game for a 6-sided dice, the user should only guess numbers between 1 and 3, but the game does not restrict what the user can guess.
