# 4.1: Intro to Scope

## Learning Objectives

By the end of this lesson, you should be able to:

* [ ] Understand where variables can be accessed depending on where they are declared in our code.
* [ ] Explain the concepts of function scope and block scope
* [ ] Understand that "global" variables in our programs in Basics are normal variables declared at the "highest" level of scope, i.e. outside all functions and blocks.

## Introduction

Javascript has three types of scope:

1. Global scope
2. Function scope
3. Block scope

Scope determines the parts of a program where values and expressions (variables) are accessible. Variables that are ' not  in scope ' are not available for referencing or use, we will not be able to use them to perform any kind of computation and will not be able to `console.log(outOfScopeVar)`

## Hierarchy of Scopes

There is a hierarchy of scopes where everything in the larger scope is accessible by code in smaller scope nested in the larger one.

### Global scope

An example would be the Global scope which extends to the whole javascript file. Any variable declared here will be accessible by functions and blocks inside. The javascript file can be considered as a 'parent' to all the nested functions and blocks that are considered as 'children'.

```javascript
let globalVariable = 0

var introScopeMain = function (input) {
  var functionVarInMain = convertKmToMiles(input);
  console.log(`globalVariable accessible in 'main function'`, globalVariable);
  return functionVarInMain;
};

if (globalVariable === 0){
  console.log(`globalVariable accessible in the 'if-block'`, globalVariable);
}

// the globalVariable is accessible everywhere in the js file!
console.log(`globalVariable accessible in globally`, globalVariable);

```

### Function scope

Function scoping applies to any variable declared in a function, any function declared in the javascript file is automatically a 'child' of the global scope.

\
Try running to code below, the `console.log` from line 3 should appear on the console as `functionVarInMain` is being accessed in the same function where it has been declared.\
\
If the `console.log` on line 7 is uncommented, a \
`script.js:7 Uncaught ReferenceError: local is not defined` error will appear, as  `functionVarInMain` cannot be accessed from outside the main function

If we tried to access `functionVarInMain` from the `otherFunction`, will we be able to use it?

```javascript
var introScopeMain = function (input) {
  var functionVarInMain = `Only accessible in the main function-block`
  console.log(`functionVarInMain access from main`, functionVarInMain)
  return functionVarInMain;
};

// console.log(`functionVarInMain access from global`, functionVarInMain)

var otherFunction = function (){
  // console.log(`functionVarInMain access from another function`, functionVarInMain)
}
```

### Block scope

Block scoping applies to any variable defined within a pair of `{}`. So far we have encounter the `if, else if, and else` blocks where this applies.

In the code below, we have an if block nested in the main function from line 4-6, this can be considered as a 'child' of the main function.&#x20;

Try running the code below, we should be able to see the console logs from line 5 and line 7 where `functionVarInMain` is accessible in the `if` child block and `awesomeVarInBlock` is accessible in the block it was declared in.

If we un-comment line 10, we will run into errors as `awesomeVarInBlock` is not accessible in it's parent the main function.

What happens when line 15 is uncommented and we try to access `awesomeVarInBlock` from the global scope?

```javascript
var introScopeMain = function (input) {
  var functionVarInMain = `Only accessible in the main function-block and its children`
  
  if (functionVarInMain !== ''){
    console.log(`functionVarInMain`, functionVarInMain);
    
    var awesomeVarInBlock = `non-empty string`
    console.log(`awesomeVarInBlock access in the if block`, awesomeVarInBlock);
  }
  
  // console.log(`awesomeVarInBlock access from main`, awesomeVarInBlock);
  return functionVarInMain;
};

//console.log(`awesomeVarInBlock access in the global scope`, awesomeVarInBlock);

```

## Exercises

### **Follow Along**

Duplicate and run the code above. Introduce more variables at different scope levels and try accessing them at the global, function, and block scope.
