# 2.3.2: Functions II

## Learning Objectives

By the end of this lesson, you should be able to:

* [ ] Build and use functions with multiple inputs.

## Introduction

We have learnt the basics of building functions in 2.3.1. We will now explore functions that take in multiple inputs, and get more practice building functions. If you attempted [Road Trip Cost (Comfortable)](../../../coursework/in-class-exercises/day-1-data-manipulation-and-functions.md#road-trip-cost-comfortable), you would have already been guided through building a function that accepts multiple input parameters. We will cover that formally here.

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/6zdWGUho6aA" %}

### Functions Can Have Multiple Input Parameters

Functions can accept more than 1 input parameter, and input parameters are assigned based on position in the input parameter list, _not_ by variable name.

For example, if we define a function with syntax like the following,

```javascript
// function that takes in two names, and returns a message
var jobApplication = function (jobTitle, companyName) {
    var message = `To whom it may concern, I would like to submit my application for ${jobTitle} at ${companyName}.`;
    return message;
};
```

and we execute it with the following,

```javascript
jobApplication(userJobInput, userCompanyInput);
```

then when the `jobApplication` function is called , `userJobInput` will be assigned to `jobTitle` and `userCompanyInput` will be assigned to `companyName`. The parameter assignment has nothing to do with the name of the input variables, and everything to do with the order of the variables passed into the function.&#x20;

This allows us to give meaningful, and different variable names within the "scope" of function definition, and the "scope" of where the function is called in the main program. This also ensures we will not run out of variable names when writing long, complex code with many functions. We will learn more about Scope in [Module 4.](../../4-scope/) For now, we will practice writing more functions.&#x20;

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/ZVtOBwWa5Yo" %}

## Exercises

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/MKoOuARpWvo" %}

For each exercise try to encapsulate each distinct operation inside a function that returns a value. For example, `daysToMinutes(3)` is a function that converts days to minutes, takes a number of days as input, and returns a number of minutes. We will first try to build functions that take in only one input, while keeping other constraints fixed. Once we have tested that the base structure and logic of our function is sound, we can then add more flexibility to our function by allowing it to take multiple inputs.

For now, our overall program will still only be able to capture and process a singular input from the user. We will learn how to capture multiple, sequential input from the user in [Module 4: Scope](../../4-scope/).

### Orange Juice Calculator

1. Write a program that takes in as input the number of expected guests for a party, and outputs the number of oranges required to make enough Orange Juice for all guests.
2. To begin, assume:
   1. It takes 4 oranges to make a glass of orange juice.&#x20;
   2. Each guest will drink 2 glasses of Orange Juice on average.&#x20;
3. Subsequently, edit the functions written such that it takes in both the number of guests as well as the number of glasses per guest as input, and produces the same output: oranges required.

### **House Paint**

Estimate the price of painting the interior of your home. The user will enter a dollar amount of paint per litre and the app will calculate how much it will cost.

1. To begin, assume that:
   1. &#x20;Each room in your 6-room house has the same area to be painted: 3m x 3m.&#x20;
   2. Paint will cover 300 square meters per litre.&#x20;
   3. You want to apply 2 coats of paint.
2. Edit the function(s) such that the number of rooms, and the number of coats to be painted are also variables that are taken in as input.

### Reference Solutions

[Click here ](https://github.com/rocketacademy/basics-starter-code-2.0/blob/day2/day02-if-statements-boolean-operators/pre-class/script.js)to view the reference solution. Please only refer to the reference solution after you have attempted the exercise. Note that there are many ways to implement the exercise and the reference solution is only 1 way
