# 2.1: Pseudocoding

## Learning Objectives

By the end of this lesson, you should be able to:

* [ ] Explain why pseudocode can be helpful
* [ ] Know how to write comments in JavaScript
* [ ] Be able to use simple pseudocode to help you write programs

## Comments

"**Comments**" let us write notes in our code files that are ignored by the program. In JavaScript, comments are denoted by 2 slashes `//` at the start of the comment. The syntax for commenting varies for different programming languages. This allows us to write notes, comments, or to-dos within our scripts, for humans to read.

```javascript
// This is an example comment. It won't actually "run".
```

## Pseudocode: Logical Expression Translation

As our code gets more complex, we will often want to plan our logic before writing code. This helps clarify our thoughts such that our code is more organised and we spend less time debugging.

"Pseudocode" is a common method to plan logic before writing code. It involves writing statements in plain English (_or your preferred human language_) that describe what we want our program to do. Once we are convinced that our pseudocode contains the correct logic, we can start to "fill in the blanks" under each English statement with the code that accomplishes that statement.

For example, if I wanted to write a program to convert kilometres to miles, I might start with pseudocode like the following:

```javascript
// Convert user input to be a number

// Assume that number is in km and convert it to miles

// Format and return the number of miles to the user
```

Now that I am clear what I want my program to do, I can then fill in the blanks with code, and verify at each step that my code does what I expected in my pseudocode.

```javascript
// Convert user input to be a number
const numKm = Number(input);

// Assume that number is in km and convert it to miles
const numMiles = numKm * 1.6

// Format and return the number of miles to the user
return `${numKm} kilometres is equal to ${numMiles} miles.`
```

Almost all developers pseudocode, regardless of seniority. Even when we may not need pseudocode to develop a program correctly, others reading our code will find it helpful to read the pseudocode.

## Advanced Pseudocode: "Top-Down" Pseudocoding

As our programs get more complex, we can pseudocode at higher and higher levels of abstraction. For example, to build a scissors paper stone game, we might start with pseudocode that looks like the following.

```
// Validate user input is one of "scissors", "paper" or "stone"

// Generate computer output (scissors, paper or stone)

// Determine winner between human and computer

// Return result message to user
```

Notice how the initial pseudocode encompasses the entire game logic without getting into details of how each component would be implemented. This is what we mean by "**top-down" pseudocode**.&#x20;

Now that we have the high-level structure of our program in pseudocode, we can proceed to "fill in the blanks" in our pseudocode with more pseudocode at lower and lower levels of abstraction.

For example, I might now fill in the pseudocode for each of the high level components with more pseudocode, which might look like the following.

```
// Validate user input is one of "scissors", "paper" or "stone"
//   If input is not scissors, paper or stone, return invalid input

// Generate computer output (scissors, paper or stone)
//   Generate a random number
//   Map that random number to scissors, paper or stone

// Determine winner between human and computer
//   ...

// Return result message to user
```

Once I am satisfied I have mapped out the logic for my program correctly, I can then start to write code with the big picture of my program in mind, minimising chances of logical errors.

