# 0.2: Web Browsers

## Learning Objectives

By the end of this lessons, you should be able to:

* Explain what a web browser is in your own words.
* Explain what role browsers play in this course, and why we use them.
* Make simple edits to a HTML file and see those changes reflected in your browser.

## What is a web browser?

A web browser is a program used to view and interact with web pages.

## Why learn about web browsers?

In Coding Basics we will use browsers as a learning tool to visualise inputs and outputs of our code through web pages. In general, web browsers are not necessary for writing and executing code.&#x20;

## HTML

Almost all websites are rendered using a markup language called HTML (HyperText Markup Language). Browsers were invented to download and render HTML on computers. The programs we will build in Coding Basics will rely on HTML to accept inputs and visualise outputs.

## Exercises

### Run Starter Code in Browser

1. Download a compressed ZIP file from [this link](https://github.com/rocketacademy/swe101-starter-code/archive/main.zip).
2. If you haven't already, create a `basics` folder in a local folder, e.g. `Documents`.
3. Move the downloaded .zip file to the `basics` folder.
4. Unzip the file - it should create a new `basics-starter-code` folder. The starter code files are in this folder.
5. Open the `index.html` file in Chrome. Double click it if Chrome is your default browser. Or, you can right click to open in Chrome.

### Change HTML Text on Page

1. Change line `62` (Basics!) to something else. Make sure to save the file before you refresh.
2. Change the text of the button on line `72`.
